The inspiration for this project came about as soccer (known as futbol/football across the world) is the world’s most popular sport, with 3.5 billion fans as compared to its American football counterpart, which only has 410 million fans. This contrast in popularity is also evident when comparing the two major events in each sport: the World Cup Final and the Super Bowl. As reported by the Federation Internationale de Football Association (FIFA), the 2022 World Cup amassed a viewership of 1.5 billion viewers, while the National Football Association (NFL) reported that the event was watched by 113 million viewers. This key difference in popularity was one of the reasons why we chose to take on the challenge of applying Digital Image Processing and Machine Learning techniques to soccer.

The history of soccer as a sport dates back to 12th-century England, but it was not until 1848, when the widely accepted Cambridge rules were adopted, that soccer became the global sport we know today. One of the key factors that make the sport as popular as it is on a global level, with it being played in over 230 countries, is the simplicity of it. All anyone needs to play is a ball. In a more formal sense, the rules are simple: one grass pitch, two teams, 11 players on each team, two forty-five minutes halves with any additional time being added by the referee, up to five substitutions per squad, and disciplinary warning being issued by the referee such as a yellow card (warning) and red card (elimination). For simplicity purposes, we only named these rules are they will be crucial for our study. 

The goal of this study is to use digital image processing techniques in order to be able to identify a team’s formation and then employ data science and machine learning techniques to suggest formations for teams based on their performance. As this project is based on digital image processing, the majority of our study will focus on the image processing we used to achieve our goal, but the data science portion is also important to note as we will work to combine both disciplines as this has the great real-world and industry applications. Specifically, for the digital image processing, we will be using techniques such as image loading, noise reduction/removal, masking and filtering, marking and centroid detection, sectioning and counting, as well as thresholding. The data science portion will focus on starting formation, and the end result of the matches played by the team.
